High in this video we're going to look at how we can coerce a float to an integer.
So in other words we want to take a float number of floating point numbers.
Potentially with digits after the decimal point but we wanted to only take an integer of it then add
the integer approximation essentially.
So that means that we're going to have in general data loss it's inevitable if we have ten point two.
Well what is the you know integer that represents ten point two.
Well it's it's not going to be ten point two it's going to be 10 it's going to be 11.
You know maybe something else but that's certainly not going to be ten point two because that's not
an integer.
So we have data loss.
So there's different ways that we can go ahead in terms of you know how do we want this data loss to
happen.
And what I mean by this is let's take a look at some numbers.
Let's look at ten point four.
If we want to cross that to an integer.
Well what should it be.
Should it be 10 should be 11.
Well this cases where you know you can make the argument that yeah I want it to be 11.
Maybe that's what you want because maybe it's you know the number of times that you have to run a loop
in order to make sure something gets completed.
And then when you do a calculation and say that's ten point four.
Well that means that 10 isn't quite enough.
Eleven will be enough.
So in other words you might actually want to take ten point four and make it into 11.
When you look at it from an integer perspective in other cases maybe you doing computations or something
and you know you say well no I want to take all the lower number I want to take 10 flip at ten point
five.
You know there again which you know where do we go is that 10 or is that 11.
You know if we rounds using rounding up the kind of typical rounding we're used to we'd say well we're
going to take 11 although tend to be an equally acceptable value.
What about ten point six.
Well that one maybe.
Yeah we'll make that 11 that's closer to 11.
You know we'll take the closest integer 0 and then also you have ten point or one or ten point nine
nine nine nine.
Where do you want to go you want to go to 10.
You want to go to 11.
Maybe something else but it has to be an integer.
So there's different methods we can use to do all this stuff and we'll take a look at that in the next
few videos.
So we have truncation we have floor we have ceiling and we have rounding.
So in this video we'll take a look at the first three.
We'll keep rounding for a separate video because that can get into a pretty kind of detailed subject
but in all cases you have data loss.
So just pick your poison and you can have some data lost when you convert to an integer.
So let's look at truncation first.
So truncations simply returns the integer portion of the number.
So basically it ignores everything after the decimal point and you just get the number that's to the
left of the decimal point.
Think of it that way.
So the math module provides us with a truncation function called trunk.
So we can use it this way.
We have to import math first obviously then we can call math out of trunk.
Ten point four.
And that will return ten ten point five will return ten ten point six will also return 10.
Right.
We're just ditching what's after the decimal point.
And it works the same way with negative numbers right which is digits after the decimal point.
And we just retain the integer portion of that float.
Now I want to talk about the int constructor very quickly here because the int constructor in Python
accepts a float so it uses truncation when casting the float to an end.
Now the words if you say into ten point four it's the same as saying trunk of ten point four.
Right.
And the same thing with these other numbers that we saw before.
So if you don't want to you know if you want to use truncation and you don't want to import the math
library or you don't want to import just the trunk from the math library you can also just use the constructor.
And it will essentially return the same thing.
So next we have a floor.
So the floor of a number is the largest integer that is less than or equal to the number.
So in mathematical notation the floor of X is the max of all than integers that are less than or equal
to x.
So let's take a look at an example of that it makes more sense if we use a number line.
So here we have the number line 10 11 and then we have you know 12 13 14 and then 9 8 7 6 etc. on both
sides and ten point four sits between 10 and 11.
So the floor is the largest integer that is less than or equal to the number.
So we're looking for the largest integer that is less than X or equal to x.
But in this case less than X it's 10.
So 10 is the floor.
Now we also have to consider negative numbers.
What's the law of negative ten point four.
While you might be tempted to say it's negative 10 but it's not Y.
Let's look at it on the number line again.
So here's minus 11 minus 10 and he has minus ten point four right sitting right between those two.
Again what's the floor.
It is the largest integer less than or equal to x.
But in this case the largest integer That's less than x is negative 11.
And so that is the flaw.
So the floor of ten point four is ten but the floor of negative ten point four is negative 11 so all
positive numbers floor and truncation are actually equivalent right.
If we took the trunk of X we would get 10 and the floor X would also be 10.
And for any positive value that will be true but that is not the case for negative values.
Right.
The truncation of x in this case will be negative 10.
But the floor is negative 11.
So be careful Floren trunk are not the same thing when it comes to negative numbers.
Not also want to talk very quickly again about flawed division we saw this div operated in a while back
and remember how we defined it.
We defined the flow division in combination with the MOD operators.
And we said it satisfied this equality here.
So this was integer division and this was the mod operator non-facts floor division and why.
The reason why it's called floor division it's because it's defined this way a div B is precisely equal
to the floor of a divided by being.
So that's why we call that the float we call that a flawed division.
And if we use this definition for floor division then it will drive the definition of the mud operator
and it will always satisfy that equality OK.
So let's look at the floor again.
So the math module provides the floor function so we can get it from the math library.
And if we get say math top floor of ten point four we get 10.
We look at ten point five.
Obviously any number within this interval here but not including 11 will floor to 10 if we have a number
equal to 11.
Its floor will be 11 right.
Because the greatest the largest number less than or equal to x.
Right.
So in this case anything from 10 up to but not including 11 full floor to 10.
And similarly with negative numbers we take any number in this interval here but excluding negative
10 they will floor to negative 11.
So all these will flow to negative 11.
So the next one is ceiling.
Seeing is kind of the opposite of floor floor.
We took the largest integer less than or equal to the number for the ceiling.
We're going to take the smallest integer greater than or equal to the number.
So again in mathematical notation the ceiling of X is the minimum over every integer such that that
integer is greater than or equal to x.
Again let's look at a number line.
So here's our number line 10 11.
And obviously it continues on.
You know both ends of the spectrum and X sits somewhere inside that interval.
So what's the ceiling.
Well the ceiling is the smallest integers that's greater than or equal to the number.
Well that would be 11 in this case right.
11 is greater than x 10 is not greater than x 12 is also greater than x but it's not the smallest integer
greater than x the smallest one is 11.
So that's our ceiling.
And obviously any number that falls within this interval excluding 10 will are ceiling to 11.
Now let's look at negative numbers some negative numbers again which look at that number line.
Negative 11 negative 10 X sits right in between the ceiling therefore is going to be negative 10.
So the ceiling is negative 10 for any number in that interval here excluding negative 11.
Obviously if the number is negative 11 or the number is 10 then the ceiling in this case would be 10
right.
Because we're looking at every number greater than or equal to the number we're looking at.
So if we're looking at 10 then I you know equal to 10 is equal to 10 and therefore the minimum will
be 10.
But anyway just be careful with your open close intervals on the floor and the ceiling.
So we'll look at some code.
Next the next video.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you in a bit.